Introducing Quarkus Data Blog Post Final (#2717)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2026-06-15-introducing-quarkus-data.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Introducing Quarkus Data: One Gateway for Data Access'
date: 2026-06-15
tags: extension hibernate data panache
synopsis: 'Quarkus Data unifies the data access experience in Quarkus'
author: lmolteni
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/introducing-quarkus-data

== Quarkus Data: One Gateway for Data Access

> You might have read Stephane's https://quarkus.io/blog/hibernate-panache-next/[blog post] about Panache Next, the new version of Panache that we're currently developing, and https://quarkus.io/blog/panache-next-renamed-to-quarkus-data/[his follow-up] on the rename to Quarkus Data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might have read Stephane's https://quarkus.io/blog/hibernate-panache-next/[blog post] about Panache Next, the new version of Panache that we're currently developing, and https://quarkus.io/blog/panache-next-renamed-to-quarkus-data/[his follow-up] on the renaming to Quarkus Data.
```

(rename is a verb)

This blog post is about what comes next.

Having discussed current database access patterns in conferences, meetings and user feedback sessions, we know that the current implementation of Panache, which we'll call Panache 1 in this blog post, is popular as a data access mechanism.
But despite Panache 1's popularity, we discovered that there is some confusion on exactly what Quarkus extension to use.

> Should a user that needs database access in a Quarkus application use the Hibernate extension, the Hibernate Reactive extension, Panache, or something else?

Reviewer: I'd refrain from using the word "user": to you, "user" is your reader, but to your reader, "user" is someone else (their customer, end-users, ...).

```suggestion
Should a Quarkus application that needs database access use the Hibernate extension, the Hibernate Reactive extension, Panache, or something else?
```

Given that Hibernate is currently the most popular extension in Quarkus (as most applications will need persistence on the database) you might imagine that this confusion is creating some friction.

Try it yourself: create a Quarkus app with the CLI, then search for a database extension:

[source,bash]
----
quarkus create app myapp
cd myapp
quarkus extension add jpa
----

image::extension-search-jpa.png[Searching for JPA returns 16 extensions]

That's a lot of results. Some of them are not obviously related, but the ones on top are misleading.
And if you try searching for "database" instead, it's even worse:

image::extension-search-database.png[Searching for database returns even more extensions]

Which one do you pick?

== From Panache to Jakarta Data

This situation is admittedly confusing, but it didn't happen by accident.
Every one of those extensions exists because it solves a real problem.
To understand how we got here, we need to go back to the early days of Quarkus.

Developers wanted a simple way to avoid writing repetitive data access code: define an entity, get basic CRUD operations, and declare queries in a single place without writing similar query methods by hand.

> Also, users love the idea of the "repository class", a class that will hold such queries and some helpers to avoid writing code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, developers love the idea of the "repository class", a class that will hold such queries and some helpers to avoid writing code.
```

At the time, there was no standard repository pattern for Hibernate, so the Quarkus team created Panache to fill that gap.
Panache provided a repository pattern, a single place to define queries for each entity, and also offered an active record pattern to simplify data access by putting persistence methods directly on their entities.

Since then, the Jakarta EE ecosystem has caught up.
Jakarta Data <<jd>> standardizes the repository pattern across SQL and NoSQL databases, with an annotation processor that generates implementations at compile time, including full type checking of queries and parameter bindings against your entity model.
It is a top-level specification in Jakarta EE 11 that supports both Jakarta Persistence and Jakarta NoSQL <<nosql>>.
With Jakarta Data now providing some of the features Panache pioneered, it was natural for the Quarkus team to build on it.

== Introducing Quarkus Data

We then created "Quarkus Data": an umbrella project for data access in Quarkus.

> It groups all data access extensions we showed earlier under a single name, making it easier to find documentation and understand how the pieces fit together.

Reviewer: I think this is wrong. The extension in itself does not make things easier. We're adding yet another extension, so there are 17 instead of 16.

Really, Quarkus Data is not the solution to the problem, it's the *start* of a solution. It's an extension with a recognizable enough name (which you explain below), but it's still hidden in the middle of many extensions, and more work will be needed to make it obvious that people should start with that.

So, I think you should mention that:

1. We're working on better guidance in our documentation, to make the "first guide to check" easier for each category, including data. @gsmet is working on it for sure, but I don't know if there is an issue/working group.
2. We plan further work on tooling to highlight / promote some extensions so that Quarkus Data will be more obviously the one to start with when using the CLI as in your example. You'll know if an issue exist more than I do, since you pointed out this issue in the first place :)

Author: I reworded taking inspiration from your point, on which I agree - tell me if you like it

This is the biggest change to data access in Quarkus since the introduction of Panache, and we believe it's a step forward for both new and existing users.

[NOTE]

> .Why "Quarkus Data" and not "Panache Next"?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Why "Quarkus Data" and not "Panache 2.0"?
```

I think everyone knows "Panache Next" was a placeholder :)

Author: I thought it was an edgier name like Xbox Series X :)

====
The Panache name was popular with our users, but it had a discoverability problem.
"Hibernate with Panache" was meant to signal a better Hibernate experience, but if you didn't already know what Panache was, the name didn't tell you.
A user searching for "hibernate" or "data" would see Panache in the results, but nothing about the name suggested it was the simpler way to do repositories, active record, or CRUD.

> We chose "Data" because the project is built on Jakarta Data, it's self-explanatory, and it might help users migrating from Spring as they're already used to the "Data" naming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We chose "Data" because the project is built on Jakarta Data, it's self-explanatory, and it might help users migrating from other frameworks as they're already used to the "Data" naming -- from Spring, Micronaut, Helidon, ...
```

It's also an opportunity to create an umbrella that covers both SQL and NoSQL under the same name.
====

> Under the Quarkus Data umbrella, there are specific modules for different backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the Quarkus Data umbrella, there can be specific modules for different backends.
```

Reviewer: (because right now there is just one)

The first one is **Quarkus Data Hibernate**, for relational databases.
In the future, additional modules like Quarkus Data MongoDB could follow the same model for NoSQL databases.

== Quarkus Data Hibernate

Quarkus Data Hibernate is now the new entry point for relational database access in Quarkus.
If you need to talk to a database, this is the one extension you add:

[source,bash]
----
quarkus extension add quarkus-data-hibernate
----

Or in your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-data-hibernate</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

This single extension gives you everything you need to start with data access in your application. It's structured in a way that makes "simple things easy, and complex things possible".
This means that it offers an experience that is enjoyable for newcomers of Hibernate, without limiting advanced users from using advanced features.

Here's a round up of the features it offers:

- **Active Record Pattern support**: entity lifecycle operations are on your entity by extending a simple class. The simplest way to get started.

> - **Repositories**: define a standalone repository interface annotated with `@Repository`. The Hibernate annotation processor generates the implementation at compile time, with full type checking of queries and parameters against your entity model.

Reviewer: I think you need to mention what developers do inside the repo. Something like this (or shorter if you manage that):

```suggestion
- **Repositories**: define a standalone repository interface annotated with `@Repository`, along with queries consisting simply in strings using the HQL/JPQL languages from Jakarta Persistence. The Hibernate annotation processor generates the implementation at compile time, with full type checking of queries and parameters against your entity model.
```

- **Stateless and Managed session**: Explicit lifecycles for simple cases, all the power of Hibernate managed objects when you need it.

> - **Reactive**: The same entity model and project work in both blocking and non-blocking modes, useful when you need to interface with reactive code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Reactive**: The same entity model and project work in both blocking and non-blocking modes, useful when you need to integrate with reactive code.
```

> - **Raw SQL**: write native SQL queries using `@SQL` on a repository method for those cases in which writing SQL is easier. No entity mapping required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Raw SQL**: write native SQL queries using `@SQL` on a repository method when writing SQL is easier. No entity mapping required.
```

[NOTE]
====
While Quarkus Data Hibernate is the main entry point, some features require an additional dependency to keep the default footprint small.
For example, reactive support requires adding `quarkus-hibernate-reactive` explicitly.
====

We'll publish a hands-on tutorial shortly that walks through each style with working examples, so stay tuned.

== What about Panache 1?

Panache 1 is not going away.
It will remain available as an extension for existing applications, and we have no plans to remove it.

That said, Quarkus Data Hibernate is where all new development and investment is happening.
If you're starting a new project, we'd encourage you to give it a try. We really believe it's a better experience.
The extension is still experimental, so you might find some bugs. If you do, please reach out to us either on GitHub or Zulip, we always appreciate your honest feedback.

We are working on migration tooling to help existing Panache 1 users transition when they are ready, and we will share more details as that work progresses.

== Try it today

You can try Quarkus Data Hibernate today from Quarkus 3.37.0.

> It will also ship in Quarkus 4.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will also ship as part of https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/discussions/52020[Quarkus 4.0].
```

---
layout: post
title: 'Introducing Quarkus Data: One Gateway for Data Access'
date: 2026-06-15
tags: extension hibernate data panache

> synopsis: 'Quarkus Data unifies the data access experience in Quarkus: the place to start.'

Reviewer 2: Two catchphrases in a single blog post, how rich!

Author: Kept only one :)

To understand how we got here, we need to go back to the early days of Quarkus.

Developers wanted a simple way to avoid writing repetitive data access code: define an entity, get basic CRUD operations, and declare queries in a single place without writing similar query methods by hand.
Also, users love the idea of the "repository class", a class that will hold such queries and some helpers to avoid writing code.
At the time, there was no standard repository pattern for Hibernate, so the Quarkus team created Panache to fill that gap.
Panache provided a repository pattern, a single place to define queries for each entity, and also offered an active record pattern to simplify data access by putting persistence methods directly on their entities.

Since then, the Jakarta EE ecosystem has caught up.
Jakarta Data <<jd>> standardizes the repository pattern across SQL and NoSQL databases, with an annotation processor that generates implementations at compile time, including full type checking of queries and parameter bindings against your entity model.
It is a top-level specification in Jakarta EE 11 that supports both Jakarta Persistence and Jakarta NoSQL <<nosql>>.

> With Jakarta Data now standardizing what Panache pioneered, it was natural for the Quarkus team to build on it.

Reviewer 2: This is not really true, IMO. There isn't much in JD that was in Panache. You could say that about the simplified queries and the ease of use to get a count query, and _some_ of the methods in `CrudRepository` but otherwise they're really focused on very different aspects of the problem and solution.
In Panache 1 the solution is easy access to APIs that are not type safe but make your lives much easier.
In JD the solution is easy implementation of these methods (that don't exist OOTB) in a way that is type-safe.

Author: "With Jakarta Data now providing some of the features Panache pioneered, it was natural for the Quarkus team to build on it."

Reviewer 2: That's more realistic yes :)

> In fact, the influence went both ways: ideas that originated in Panache, like writing partial HQL clauses that restrict a generated query rather than writing the full query from scratch, shaped the direction of the Jakarta Data specification itself.

Reviewer 2: That seems to double down on what you said above.

Author: Removed

== Introducing Quarkus Data

> We then created "Quarkus Data", an umbrella project for data access in Quarkus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We then created "Quarkus Data": an umbrella project for data access in Quarkus.
```

[NOTE]
.Why "Quarkus Data" and not "Panache Next"?
====
The Panache name was popular with our users, but it had a discoverability problem.
"Hibernate with Panache" was meant to signal a better Hibernate experience, but if you didn't already know what Panache was, the name didn't tell you.
A user searching for "hibernate" or "data" would see Panache in the results, but nothing about the name suggested it was the simpler way to do repositories, active record, or CRUD.
We chose "Data" because the project is built on Jakarta Data, it's self-explanatory, and it might help users migrating from Spring as they're already used to the "Data" naming.
It's also an opportunity to create an umbrella that covers both SQL and NoSQL under the same name.
====

Under the Quarkus Data umbrella, there are specific modules for different backends.
The first one is **Quarkus Data Hibernate**, for relational databases.
In the future, additional modules like Quarkus Data MongoDB could follow the same model for NoSQL databases.

== Quarkus Data Hibernate

> Quarkus Data Hibernate is the entry point for relational database access in Quarkus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quarkus Data Hibernate is now the new entry point for relational database access in Quarkus.
```

?

If you need to talk to a database, this is the one extension you add:

[source,bash]
----
quarkus extension add quarkus-data-hibernate
----

Or in your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-data-hibernate</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

This single extension gives you everything you need to start with data access in your application. It's structured in a way that makes "simple things easy, and complex things possible".
This means that it offers an experience that is enjoyable for newcomers of Hibernate, without limiting advanced users from using advanced features.

Here's a round up of the features it offers:

> - **Active Record Pattern support**: persistence operations live directly on your entity by extending a simple class. The simplest way to get started.

Reviewer 2: You could call it that, but it's not. This is just giving entities their lifecycle instance methods.

Active Records had the query methods as part of the entity type, which is not the case here since they're all in repositories.

I mean, this might be confusing.

Author: I reworded it, but are you suggesting not using "Active Record" altogether?

Reviewer 2: I don't think they are active records, not in the sense of RoR, though. They're entities with 3-4 lifecycle methods, and repositories.

Author: I'm changing it to "richer entities"

[NOTE]
====
While Quarkus Data Hibernate is the main entry point, some features require an additional dependency to keep the default footprint small.
For example, reactive support requires adding `quarkus-hibernate-reactive` explicitly.
====

We'll publish a hands-on tutorial shortly that walks through each style with working examples, so stay tuned.

== What about Panache 1?

Panache 1 is not going away.
It will remain available as an extension for existing applications, and we have no plans to remove it.

That said, Quarkus Data Hibernate is where all new development and investment is happening.
If you're starting a new project, we'd encourage you to give it a try. We really believe it's a better experience.
The extension is still experimental, so you might find some bugs. If you do, please reach out to us either on GitHub or Zulip, we always appreciate your honest feedback.

We are working on migration tooling to help existing Panache 1 users transition when they are ready, and we will share more details as that work progresses.

== Try it today

> You can try Quarkus Data Hibernate today from Quarkus 3.37.0.

Reviewer 2: We should probably publish this after we've renamed the types and packages? Hopefully this can be merged soon, but it will have to wait for 3.38 🤷

Author: I'd love it to publish it in these days, so 3.37 seems adeguate. I don't think renaming the classes makes such a difference... and besides it's alle experimental

Reviewer 2: It is, it's just that it's likely people will feel pain with the rename, so more people looking at this means more angry users? Also, main and 3.37 is not what I showed in the Quarkus Insights (yet).

Otherwise, it's not overly problematic, so… as you wish 🤷

Reviewer: Didn't you work on recipes to automatically handle the renaming in applications? Or did I misunderstand what those were for?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, true. Well, Luca did for the module name. My rename PR doesn't yet have the recipes for the rename, but I should add them.

Author: If I'm not mistaken this blog post doesn't talk about specifics of the class names, so we can safely publish. The tutorial, on the other hand...

It will also ship in Quarkus 4.0.

> Give it a try and let us know what you think. Feedback is welcome on https://quarkusio.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/187038-dev/topic/WG.20-.20Panache.2ENext[Zulip] or via https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues[GitHub issues].

Reviewer 2: The channel is named `WG - Quarkus Data` now
